docs: stack public state (#4)
defi-wonderland/aztec-handbook: docs/stack/overview.md

# Overview 

Aztec's global state is a cryptographically authenticated set of data structures that encode the persistent status of the network, updated only when new L2 blocks are sequenced and verified. It is structured as a collection of cryptographic Merkle trees, each serving distinct roles in maintaining privacy, preventing double-spends, synchronizing with L1, and executing public contract logic.

> Unlike traditional blockchains that rely on single key-value Merkle trees, Aztec’s model accommodates **both private and public state** and is fundamentally shaped by the privacy constraints of zk execution. This necessitates a non-standard **dual-tree model** with asymmetric update and access semantics.

Reviewer: The dual-tree model is only for private state, public state is handled differently.

## Dual-Tree Design for Private State

The private state **must** be updated without revealing correlations between accesses. The standard Merkle key-value paradigm is unsuitable because updates, even if encrypted, would leak timing and structure.

To circumvent this, Aztec uses:

* A **note tree**: an append-only Merkle tree storing note hashes.
* A **nullifier tree**: an indexed Merkle tree marking spent notes, used to prevent reuse.

This enables safe updates through a **replace-via-append** strategy:

1. Inserting a new note into the data tree.
2. Emitting a deterministic nullifier derived from the old note.

### Nullifier Computation and Isolation

To prevent cross-contract interference and ensure unlinkability, nullifiers are:

* **Isolated** by contract (something like `nullifier = hash([contract, base_nullifier], DOMAIN)`).
* **Deterministically derived** from note preimage data (ownership secret/randomness).

> Incorrect or non-deterministic nullifier computation risks either **revealing identity** or **enabling double-spend**.

Reviewer: The third important missing property is 'secret' - this is what unlinks notes from their nullifiers, since the secret nullifying key is required to compute them. E.g. even if I create a note for you, I cannot know when you spend it because I don't know how to compute its nullifier, even though the computation is deterministic.

## Secure State Access

State reads during proving introduce subtle consistency and privacy concerns:

* **Membership in Notes Tree**: Users prove inclusion of notes using append-only history. Since the tree never deletes leaves, historical roots can be used.

* **Non-Membership in Nullifier Tree**: Must be proved **at the head** of the chain. A user cannot prove non-membership themselves because the set of nullifiers changes frequently.

Instead, the **sequencer performs the non-membership check and inserts the nullifier**:

* Transactions include the nullifier.
* The sequencer checks it's not already present, proves non-membership, and inserts it.
* Conflicting nullifiers will fail inclusion.

### Read = Write (for Privacy)

> To obscure read operations from write operations:

Reviewer: Obscuring is not the reason why reads nullify. Private mutable values (e.g. `PrivateMutables`) are nullified and re-created because it is not otherwise possible to prove that you're reading the current value for the variable. You can prove existence of any of the notes the value has gone through, but you cannot prove that the nullifier of any of them doesn't exist (as mentioned above).

Instead, what you _can_ do is emit the nullifier (and in so doing tie the validity of your tx to that nullifier not existing, which is sort of equivalent to 'proving' that it did not exist), but this of course requires also that you re-create the note so that you can later mutate it or read it.

> * Even reads emit nullifiers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Reads also emit nullifiers.
```

* A fresh note (with same plaintext but new randomness) is created.

This ensures **semantic indistinguishability** from writes. The cost is that shared notes between users become mutable, once read, they’re re-emitted, invalidating other transactions that depended on the original.

## State Categories and Merkle Tree Types

> In Aztec, we will partition the global state across five specialized Merkle trees:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Aztec, global state is partitioned across five specialized Merkle trees:
```

| **Nullifier Tree**     | Stores spent-note nullifiers, prevents reuse | Indexed     | Non-membership                                         |
| **Public Data Tree**   | Key-value store for public contract state    | Indexed     | Membership + Non-membership                            |
| **L1→L2 Message Tree** | Stores inbound messages from L1              | Append-only | Membership (uses nullifier tree for replay protection) |
| **Archive Tree**       | Stores historic block headers                | Append-only | Membership (used in private proofs)                    |

### Indexed Merkle Trees

Used for the **nullifier** and **public data** trees, indexed Merkle trees (IMTs) enable efficient non-membership proofs:

* Each leaf contains a `(value, nextValue, nextIndex)` triple.
* Trees behave like a Merkle-linked list, allowing binary search for bounding nodes.

This avoids sparse tree overhead and reduces the cost of non-membership proofs from 256 hashes to log-scaled bounds.

## Isolation and Commitment Semantics

Isolation is used extensively across the trees to prevent cross-domain interference. For example:

> ```rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```noir
```

This should work

fn compute_siloed_note_hash(commitment, contract, tx):
  let index = index_of(commitment, tx.commitments)
  let nonce = hash([tx.tx_hash, index], NOTE_HASH_NONCE)
  let unique = hash([nonce, commitment], UNIQUE_NOTE_HASH)
  return hash([contract, unique], SILOED_NOTE_HASH)
```

Each note commitment is made unique and siloed per contract to enforce:

* Independence of contract states
* Replay resistance

> * Deterministic derivation of nullifiers

Reviewer: Not sure what you mean by 'replay resistance', I wouldn't really say that notes are replay resistant. If anything nulliifiers are what prevent replays.

And deterministic derivation of nullifiers is not related to note hash computation. The reason why note hashes are made unique is to then make it possible to have unique _nullifiers_ for each note, so that notes can never share nullifiers and faerie gold attacks are prevented.
